Introduction (909 of 1000 characters)
    The relationship between animal pollinator species and the crops that they propagate is a necessary problem to elucidate due to recent decreasing density of pollinator species.  Studying origination, ages, and ranges of pollinators and the species they propagate will give information on how vital pollinators are to ecosystems and possibilities for preserving these players in crop cultivation. If there is a correlation between origination events, ages of observed fossils, and range between various pollinator and crop species then there can be further study of the necessity of animal pollinators for the success of crop species, not just origination.  I will collect necessary age and range data from the Paleobiology Database and Neotoma Paleobiology Database of Chiroptera, Anthophila, Lepidoptera, Brassica, and Rosaceae to examine these relationships for co-occurrences in range during specific ages.
                 
Justification (1987 of 2500 characters)
    Crop propagation is a growing issue with the earth’s rapid change in climate.  Not only is it more difficult to maintain crops due to droughts, floods, and soil conditions but is also due to a decrease in density of pollinators.  Of chief importance is predicted disappearance of bees due to climate change (Memmott, 2007).  The decrease in natural animal pollinators has been correlated to a loss in plant species that depend on animal vectors for seed dispersal (Biesmeijer, 2006) (Olesen, 2007). Decreases in bumble bee density has also been due to the introduction of foreign bee species in recent years, the necessity of intervention to distribute and the observed change flight patterns of these species (Goulson, 2008).  Plant species that rely on animal pollinators have also been shown to experience habitat fragmentation, which is deleterious to the propagation and survival of the species due to edge effects (Aguilar, 2006). Food crops are not the only group at risk of a decline in propagation; a study by Haussmann et. al. has also found a dependence in success of city trees on wild bee pollination, with implications for the preservation green spaces in city (Haussmann, 2016). Current solutions to bee population decline include design of networks for pollinators, transportation of pollinators to suffering areas, and creating forage patches (Cane, 2001).  
    There are some conclusions drawn regarding the robustness of pollinator species compared to pollinator decreases in experimentally simulated studies (Astegiano, 2015) (Vieira, 2013) (Memmott, 2004). These studies however, focus on present-day relationships and the effects that pollinator loss has on generalized species or on specific regions (Cianciaruso, 2013). Past studies also focus on specific time periods and species to examine past pollination behaviors (Wappler et. al., 2015). The study proposed focuses on more general past relationships to elucidate how present-day relationships can be improved. 

Research Plan (1336 of 2500 characters)
    Data for this project will be collected from the Paleobiology Database created by the Department of Geoscience and the Neotoma Paleobiology Database and analyzed using R studio.  All occurrences for Chiroptera (bats), Anthophila (bees), Lepidoptera (moths), Brassica (cruciferous plants), and Rosaceae (flowering fruits) will be collected.  These animal species are all pollinators of the two plant species listed so conclusions could be generalized across relationships. Average age and range will be reported after compiling collections.  Then data will be analyzed for Jaccard similarity indices.  An example matrix is provided detailing each relationship to be examined between pollinator and crop type. Jaccard distances will then be compared to find which pollinator and crop species are most similar. The most similar species are most likely species that heavily rely on that animal pollinator for propagation.  These values will be compared to Sorensen-Dice indices as another representation of similarity.  Using the Macrostrat database I will then look at the regions where these pollinators are found to examine the ecosystem they have previously been found in. This information can assist with the preservation of natural habitats for these species or for the creation of artificial habitats to maintain pollinator density. 

References (2269 of 2500 characters)

Aguilar, R., Ashworth, L., Galetto, L., &Aizen, M. A. 2006. Plant reproductive susceptibility to habitat fragmentation: review and synthesis through a meta-analysis. Ecology Letters 9(8), 968-80.
Astegiano, J., Massol, F., Vidal, M. M., Cheptou, P. O. & Guimaraes, P.R. 2015. The Robustness of Plant-Pollinator Assemblages: Linking Plant Interaction Patterns and Sensitivity to Pollinator Loss. Plos One 10(2), 16.
Biesmeijer, J.C., Roberts, S. P. M., Reemer, M., Ohlemuller, R., Edwards, M., Peeters, T., Schaffers, A. P., Potts, S. G., Kleukers, R., Thomas, C.D., Settele, J. & Kunin, W. E. 2006. Parallel declines in pollinators and insect-pollinated plants in Britain and the Netherlands. Science 313(5785), 351-54.
Cane, J. H. 2001. Habitat fragmentation and native bees: a premature verdict? Conservation Ecology 5(1), art. no.-3.
Cianciaruso, M. V., Batalha, M. A. & Petchey, O. L. 2013. High Loss of Plant Phylogenetic and Functional Diversity Due to Simulated Extinctions of Pollinators and Seed Dispersers in a Tropical Savanna. Natureza & Conservacao 11(1), 36-42.
Goulson, D., Lye, G. C. & Darvill, B. 2008. Decline and conservation of bumble bees. In Annual Review of Entomology pp. 191-208. Palo Alto: Annual Reviews.
Hausmann, S. L., Petermann, J. S. & Rolff, J.  2016. Wild bees as pollinators of city trees. Insect Conservation and Diversity 9(2), 97-107.
Memmott, J., Craze, P. G., Waser, N. M. & Price, M. V. 2007. Global warming and the disruption of plant-pollinator interactions. Ecology Letters 10(8), 710-17.
Memmott, J., Waser, N. M. & Price, M. V. 2004. Tolerance of pollination networks to species extinctions. Proceedings of the Royal Society B-Biological Sciences 271(1557), 2605-11.
Olsen, J. M., Bascompte, J., Dupont, Y. L. & Jordano, P. 2007. The modularity of pollination networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 104(50), 19891-96.
Vieira, M. C., Cianciaruso, M. V. & Almeida-Neto, M. 2013. Plant-Pollinator Coextinctions and the Loss of Plant Functional and Phylogenetic Diversity. Plos One 8(11), 10.
Wappler, T., Labandeira, C.C., Engel, M.S., Zetter, R. and Grimsson, F., 2015, Specialized and Generalized Pollen-Collection Strategies in an Ancient Bee Lineage. Current Biology, 25: 3092-3098.
