Reading Week 9

Decoupling of taxonomic and ecologic severity of Phanerozoic marine mass extinctions
Mary L. Droser, David J. Bottjer, Peter M. Sheehan, George R. McGhee Jr.

Summary

The authors recognized that while many scientists are concerned with how taxonomic changes are evidenced by mass extinction events in the fossil record, the overall ecological effect of mass extinctions is not examined in as much detail.  To examine ecological changes during extinction events, the authors categorize levels of change.  Level one is the creation of a new ecosystem. Second level changes include major structural changes to the ecology of the environment. Level three is a community shift within the existing ecological structure characterized by the appearance or disappearance of a community. Finally, the fourth level of change is the shift of paleocommunities. 
Specifically, the authors characterize ecological shifts after the Late Ordovician and Late Devonian extinction events.  In the Late Ordovician extinction there was not a major event for the reef system, a decline in brachiopod diversity at the fourth level, and a decline in trilobites at the third level.  In the Late Devonian mass extinction reef ecosystems were destroyed, there was a permanent loss of oceanic zooplankton, and a shift in brachiopod dominance in the benthic zone which resulted in second level change.  Another second level change was that placoderm families that survived the mass extinction became exclusively fresh water.  While the Late Ordovician extinction resulted in a greater taxonomic loss, the Late Devonian extinction had a greater ecological impact, hence the decoupling of ecological and taxonomic impact of a mass extinction event.  The authors also conclude that some species are more important than others in determining the ecological impact their extinction may have.  Keystone species have great ecological value and impact but small biomass value and the removal of these species causes restructuring of the ecosystem.

What I liked

I like that the authors created their own levels of ecological change that Mary Droser had established in a previous paper.  This gives the authors a unique set of criteria to work off of and gave the reader a more detailed description of categories than is normally provided. I also really like how the authors first defined their parameters and classifications and then analyzed the extinction events within this lens. Finally, the discussion also had good points about how persistent species also have an impact on ecosystems, not just species that go extinct.

What I didn’t like

I think the authors should have made their own figure for this article instead of using a compilation of other figures. This would have given the authors a chance to summarize their findings, even if they didn’t do extensive analytical tests or correlations.  I think there also needed to be more explanation about why these two extinction events were chosen to analyze and why they did not analyze all known extinction events in history.

Figures

Figure 1 gives the reader a nicely aligned representation of the environments that different fauna lived in throughout time.  I would have liked to seen an original map or summary table to extinction events and level changes included for this article. 
