Global Biodiversity Scenarios for the Year 2100

Summary

In this review, the authors touch on the major changes that are predicted to occur on a global scale due to climate change and the impact that each of these changes will have on biodiversity in select climate regions, both terrestrial and aquatic.  The most important variables of change that the Earth will experience in the next 90 years are predicted to be changes in land use, atmospheric CO2, nitrogen deposition, climate changes, and biotic exchanges between ecosystems.  The authors calculated the expected changes for each of these variables in each biome they chose to examine and then estimated the impact on biodiversity that each variable will have on each biome.  In this model, the authors assume there are no interactions between variables, interactions are antagonistic, and biodiversity will respond to the variable that it is most sensitive to.
With respect to land use, the IMAGE model that the authors used predicts that most land-use change will occur in tropical and temperate forests and the least will be in arctic and alpine forests due to human influence.  The authors found that land-use change is the largest driver of biodiversity change with below-ground species being most at risk for decreased biodiversity and this was true across all biomes analyzed.  A reason why land-use is predicted to be the largest driver in changes in biodiversity include human influence, especially on waterways and terrestrial biomes near bodies of water. The authors conclude that atmospheric CO2 levels will change in each biome equally since it is a diffusible gas but will have a greater impact in biomes where plants are highly water-dependent and need a balance of CO2 and water so the savannas and grasslands are most at risk of biodiversity loss.  Nitrogen deposition is expected to rise in northern biomes and will have the greatest impact in biomes such as temperate forests where plants that normally are limited by nitrogen availability will be able to outcompete other species. Climate is expected to warm drastically at higher latitudes but also have a general warming effect and so biomes that experience changes in precipitation and temperature fluctuations will experience extreme changes in biodiversity.  Biotic introductions or exchanges depend on human influence and movement and will vary according to biological conditions in each biome and biomes that have been isolated thus far will experience the greatest change in biodiversity. The authors conclude the review by stating that under their three different assumptions, biodiversity change in biomes will vary depending if interactions are antagonistic or synergistic (Figure 3). They highlight these interactions since it is known that drivers of change all interact with each other and impact the degree to which each variable changes. 

What I liked

What I really liked about this review was that the authors took their conclusions and findings and stated the implications for real-world application of these concepts.  It’s easy for researchers to state their conclusions and the impact that these conclusions have on the system being studied but suggesting for further research and explanation to policy makers gives the authors an edge. I also liked how the authors split up defining each driving force, the effect it generally has, and then the ultimate prediction. This made it easier to read.  

What I didn’t like

Even though this is a review article I think having more of an explanation of the techniques used to model biome changes could have been useful for the reader.  The authors compensate with a multitude of figures to show relationships that they discuss in the paper but it leaves the reader skeptical of their conclusions.  However, the authors do mention that an additional article outlining analytical methods that will be published separately in the Uncertainties section.


Figures

Tables 1-4 are a clean way of representing the conclusions detailed in the beginning of the article however, without the metric specified it is slightly confusing as to how the authors measured “expected changes” and if these numbers are standardized to the “lowest” biome/driving force relationship found.  There is also no explanation for what “low (1) to high (2)” actually means in terms of change. Figures 1 and 2 are a great way to show relative changes between biomes for each driving force but again lack an explanation of the units or measurements taken. Figure 3 is really useful for the reader to visualize the different assumptions the authors detailed at the beginning of the article and the global placement of these effects.
